"Thank you New Hampshire!"
"Thank You Iowa!"
"It looks like we are in a
virtual tie."
"There is so much at stake in
this election."
"We will need to come together
and unite this party..."
"Senator Sanders and I share a
lot of the same goals,
but there are differences."
"Secretary Clinton does
represent the establishment."
"I am not going to make promises
I can't keep."
"What happened here in New
Hampshire,
that is what will happen all
over the country."
"We are going to fight for every
vote in every state."
"Are you guys ready for a
radical idea?"
"You've got to be ready on day
one."
This is the PBS NewsHour
Democratic Debate
in partnership with Facebook.
WOODRUFF: Good
evening, and thank you.
We are happy to welcome
you to Milwaukee for this
Democratic debate.
WOODRUFF: We are
especially pleased to
thank our partners at
Facebook, who have helped
us set up a vibrant
conversation among voters
who are undecided.
And tonight you're going
to hear some of their
questions for
the candidates.
And you can follow
along at home on the PBS
NewsHour page on Facebook.
We also want to thank our
hosts, the University of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, on
whose campus we meet, here
in the beautiful Helen
Bader Concert Hall.
IFILL: We want to also
extend our warm thanks to
Milwaukee Public Radio
and Milwaukee Public
Television, as well as all
of our friends at the PBS
member stations across the
country tuning in tonight.
This is the sixth time the
Democrats have met face to
face.
Each time, we learn
more about them and the
presidents they say
they want to be.
You know you're watching
-- whether you're a
Democrat, a Republican,
or neither -- because you
believe the outcome of the
election is important to
you.
And we believe that, too.
With that, let's welcome
the candidates to the
stage.
Senator Bernie
Sanders of Vermont.
(APPLAUSE)
WOODRUFF: Welcome,
Senator, great to see you.
And former Secretary of
State Hillary Clinton.
(APPLAUSE)
Very good to be
here with you.
CLINTON: Thank you.
IFILL: Welcome
to you both.
WOODRUFF: Now, a
word about format.
There will be two short
breaks, and the rules are
simple: 90 seconds for
each answer and 30 seconds
for the other
candidate to respond.
IFILL: With Iowa and New
Hampshire behind us, we
are now broadening the
conversation to America's
heartland and beyond,
including here in
Wisconsin.
Now let's turn to the
candidates for their
opening statements.
The order was
decided by coin toss.
And, Senator Sanders,
you go first.
SANDERS: Well, Gwen and
Judy, thank you very much
for hosting this event.
And, PBS, thank you.
Nine months ago,
our campaign began.
And when it began, we had
no political organization,
no money, and not much
name recognition outside
of the state of Vermont.
A lot has happened
in nine months.
And what has happened
is, I think, the American
people have responded to
a series of basic truths,
and that is that we have
today a campaign finance
system which is corrupt,
which is undermining
American democracy, which
allows Wall Street and
billionaires to pour huge
sums of money into the
political process to elect
the candidates of their
choice.
SANDERS: And aligned with
a corrupt campaign finance
system is a
rigged economy.
And that's an economy
where ordinary Americans
are working longer
hours for low wagers.
They are worried to death
about the future of their
kids.
And yet they are seeing
almost all new income and
all new wealth going
to the top 1 percent.
And then in addition to
that, the American people
are looking around and
they see a broken criminal
justice system.
They see more people in
jail in the United States
of America than any other
country on earth, 2.2
million.
We're spending $80 billion
a year locking up fellow
Americans.
They see kids getting
arrested for marijuana,
getting in prison, getting
a criminal record, while
they see executives
on Wall Street who pay
billions of dollars in
settlements and get no
prosecution at all.
No criminal
records for them.
I think what our campaign
is indicating is that the
American people are tired
of establishment politics,
tired of establishment
economics.
They want a political
revolution in which
millions of Americans
stand up, come together,
not let the Trumps of the
world divide us, and say,
you know what, in this
great country, we need a
government that represents
all of us, not just a
handful of wealthy
campaign contributors.
Thank you.
IFILL: Thank you,
Senator Sanders.
(APPLAUSE)
IFILL: Thank you,
Senator Sanders.
Secretary Clinton.
CLINTON: I'm running for
president to knock down
all the barriers that are
holding Americans back,
and to rebuild the ladders
of opportunity that will
give every American
a chance to advance,
especially those who have
been left out and left
behind.
I know a lot of Americans
are angry about the
economy.
And for good cause.
Americans haven't had
a raise in 15 years.
There aren't enough
good-paying jobs,
especially for
young people.
And yes, the economy is
rigged in favor of those
at the top.
We both agree that we have
to get unaccountable money
out of our political
system and that we have to
do much more to ensure
that Wall Street never
wrecks main street again.
But I want to go further.
I want to tackle those
barriers that stand in the
way of too many
Americans right now.
African-Americans who face
discrimination in the job
market, education,
housing, and the criminal
justice system.
Hardworking immigrant
families living in fear,
who should be brought out
of the shadows so they and
their children can
have a better future.
Guaranteeing that women's
work finally gets the pay,
the equal pay
that we deserve.
I think America can only
live up to its potential
when we make sure that
every American has a
chance to live up to
his or her potential.
That will be my
mission as president.
And I think together
we will make progress.
WOODRUFF: Thank you both.
(APPLAUSE)
And we'll be right back
after a short break to
begin questions.
(COMMERCIAL BREAK)
WOODRUFF: And, welcome
back to this PBS Newshour
debate, Democratic
debate, here in Milwaukee.
Let's get right
to the questions.
Senator Sanders,
to you first.
Coming off the results in
Iowa and New Hampshire,
there are many voters who
are taking a closer look
at you, and your ideas,
and they're asking how big
a role do you foresee for
the federal government?
It's already spending
21% of the entire U.S.
economy.
How much larger would
government be in the lives
of Americans under a
Sanders presidency?
SANDERS: Well, to put
that in a context, Judy, I
think we have to
understand that in the
last 30 years in this
country there has been a
massive transfer of wealth
going from the hands of
working families into the
top one-tenth of 1% whose
percentage of
wealth has doubled.
In other words, the very
rich are getting richer,
almost everybody is
going -- getting poorer.
What I believe is the
United States, in fact,
should join the rest of
the industrialized world
and guarantee healthcare
to all people.
Our Medicare for all
single-payer proposal will
save the average middle
class family $5,000 a
year.
I do believe that in the
year 2016 we have to look
in terms of public
education as colleges as
part of public education
making public colleges and
universities tuition free.
I believe that when real
unemployment is close to
10%, and when our
infrastructure, our roads,
our bridges, our water
systems, Flint, Michigan
comes to mind.
Our waste water plants,
our rail, our airports, in
many places are
disintegrating.
Yeah, we can create 13
million jobs by rebuilding
our infrastructure at
a cost of a trillion
dollars.
WOODRUFF: But, my
question is how big would
government be?
Would there be any limit
on the size of the role of
government...
SANDERS: ... Of course
there will be a limit, but
when today you have
massive levels of income
and wealth inequality,
when the middle class is
disappearing, you have
the highest rate of child
poverty of almost any
major country on Earth.
Yes, in my view, the
government of a democratic
society has a moral
responsibility to play a
vital role in making sure
all of our people have a
decent standard of living.
CLINTON: Judy, I think
that the best analysis
that I've seen based on
Senator Sanders plans is
that it would probably
increase the size of the
federal government by
about 40%, but what is
most concerning to me is
that in looking at the
plans -- let's take
healthcare for example.
Last week in a CNN town
hall, the Senator told a
questioner that the
questioner would spend
about $500 dollars in
taxes to get about $5,000
dollars in healthcare.
Every progressive
economist who has analyzed
that says that the numbers
don't add up, and that's a
promise that cannot be
kept, and it's really
important now that we are
getting into the rest of
the country that both of
us are held to account for
explaining what we
are proposing because,
especially with
healthcare, this is not
about math.
This is about people's
lives, and we should level
with the American people
about what we can do to
make sure they get quality
affordable healthcare.
SANDERS: Well, let us
level with the American
people.
Secretary Clinton has been
going around the country
saying Bernie Sanders
wants to dismantle the
Affordable Care Act,
people are going to lose
their MedicAid, they're
going to lose their CHIP
program.
I have fought my entire
life to make sure that
healthcare is a
right for all people.
We're not going to
dismantle everything.
But, here is the truth.
Twenty-nine million people
have no health insurance
today in America.
We pay, by far, the
highest prices in the
world for
prescription drugs.
One out of five Americans
can't even afford the
prescriptions their
doctors are writing.
Millions of people have
high deductibles and
co-payments.
What I said, and let me
repeat it, I don't know
what economists Secretary
Clinton is talking to, but
what I have said, and let
me repeat it, that yes,
the middle -- the family
right in the middle of the
economy would pay $500
dollars more in taxes, and
get a reduction in their
healthcare costs of $5,000
dollars.
In my view healthcare is a
right of all people, not a
privilege, and I
will fight for that.
(APPLAUSE)
CLINTON: I can only say
that we both share the
goal of universal
health care coverage.
You know, before it was
called Obamacare, it was
called Hillarycare.
And I took on the drug
companies and I took on
the insurance companies
to try to get us universal
health care coverage.
(APPLAUSE)
And why I am a staunch
supporter of President
Obama's principal
accomplishment -- namely
the Affordable Care Act --
is because I know how hard
it was to get that done.
We are at 90
percent coverage.
We have to get
the remaining 10.
I've set forth very
specific plans about how
to get costs down,
especially prescription
drug costs.
And it is difficult to
in any way argue with the
goal that we both share.
But I think the American
people deserve to know
specifically how
this would work.
If it's Medicare for all,
then you no longer have
the Affordable Care Act,
because the Affordable
Care Act, as you know
very well, is based on the
insurance system, based
on exchanges, based on a
subsidy system.
The Children's Health
Insurance Program, which I
helped to create, which
covers 8 million kids, is
also a different
kind of program.
So if you're having
Medicare for all,
single-payer, you need to
level with people about
what they will have at the
end of the process you are
proposing.
And based on every
analysis that I can find
by people who are
sympathetic to the goal,
the numbers don't add
up, and many people will
actually be worse off
than they are right now.
IFILL: Final
thought, Senator.
SANDERS: That is
absolutely inaccurate.
Look, here is the
reality, folks.
There is one major country
on Earth that does not
guarantee health
care to all people.
There is one major country
-- the United States --
which ends up spending
almost three times per
capita what they
do in the U.K.
guaranteeing health care
to all people, 50 percent
more than they do in
France guaranteeing health
care to all people, far
more than our Canadian
neighbors, who guarantee
health care to all people.
Please do not tell me that
in this country, if -- and
here's the if -- we have
the courage to take on the
drug companies, and have
insurance companies, and
the medical equipment
suppliers, if we do that,
yes, we can guarantee
health care to all people
in a much more cost
effective way.
CLINTON: Well, let me just
-- let me just say, once
again...
(APPLAUSE)
... that, having been in
the trenches fighting for
this, I believe strongly
we have to guarantee
health care.
I believe we are on
the path to doing that.
The last thing we need is
to throw our country into
a contentious debate
about health care again.
And we are not England.
We are not France.
We inherited a system that
was set up during World
War II; 170 million
Americans get health
insurance right now
through their employers.
So what we have tried
to do and what President
Obama succeeded in doing
was to build on the health
care system we have, get
us to 90 percent coverage.
We have to get the other
10 percent of the way to
100.
I far prefer that and
the chances we have to be
successful there than
trying to start all over
again, gridlocking our
system, and trying to get
from zero to 100 percent.
(APPLAUSE)
IFILL: I'd like
to move along.
I'd like to move along.
Secretary Clinton, you
might -- you also have
proposed fairly expansive
ideas about government.
You may remember this
pledge from a State of the
Union Address at which I
believe you were present,
in which these words were
said: "The era of big
government is over."
You may remember that.
When asked your feelings
about the federal
government this week, 61
percent of New Hampshire
Democrats told exit
pollsters that they are
angry or at least
dissatisfied.
Given what you and Senator
Sanders are proposing, an
expanding government in
almost every area of our
lives, is it fair for
Americans who fear
government to fear you?
CLINTON: No.
But it is absolutely
fair and necessary for
Americans to vet both of
our proposals, to ask the
really hard questions
about, what is it we think
we can accomplish, why do
we believe that, and what
would be the results
for the average American
family?
In my case, whether it's
health care, or getting us
to debt-free tuition,
or moving us toward paid
family leave, I have been
very specific about where
I would raise the money,
how much it would cost,
and how I would move
this agenda forward.
I've tried to be as
specific to answer
questions so that my
proposals can be vetted,
because I feel like we
have to level with people
for the very reason, Gwen,
that you are mentioning.
There is a great deal
of skepticism about the
federal government.
I'm aware of that.
It comes from the right,
from the left, from people
on all sides of the
political spectrum.
CLINTON: So we have a
special obligation to make
clear what we stand for,
which is why I think we
should not make promises
we can't keep, because
that will further, I
think, alienate Americans
from understanding and
believing we can together
make some real changes
in people's lives.
IFILL: But I haven't heard
either of you put a price
tag on your -- you say...
(CROSSTALK)
CLINTON: I will
put a price tag.
My price tag is about
$100 billion a year.
And again, paid for.
And what I have said is I
will not throw us further
into debt.
I believe I can get the
money that I need by
taxing the wealthy, by
closing loopholes, the
things that we are
way overdue for doing.
And I think once I'm in
the White House we will
have enough political
capital to be able to do
that.
But I am conscious of the
fact that we have to also
be very clear, especially
with young people, about
what kind of government is
going to do what for them
and what it will cost.
IFILL: Senator?
SANDERS: Well, Secretary
Clinton, you're not in the
White House yet.
And let us be clear that
every proposal that I have
introduced has
been paid for.
For example, all right,
who in America denies that
we have an infrastructure
that is crumbling?
Roads, bridges, water
systems, wastewater
plants, who denies that?
Who denies that real
unemployment today,
including those who have
given up looking for work
and are working part-time
is close to 10 percent?
Who denies that
African-American youth
unemployment, real,
is over 50 percent.
We need to create jobs.
So yes, I will do away
with the outrageous
loopholes that allow
profitable multinational
corporations to stash
billions of dollars in the
Cayman Islands and Bermuda
and in a given year pay
zero, zero in
federal income tax.
Yes, I'm going to
do away with that.
We will use those
proceeds, a hundred
billion a year, to
invest in rebuilding our
infrastructure.
Yes, I believe that as
a result of the illegal
behavior on Wall Street,
that they are a Wall
Street that drove this
country into the worst
economic downturn since
the Great Recession --
Great Depression.
Yes, I do believe that now
after the American people
bailed Wall Street out,
yes, they should pay a
Wall Street speculation
tax so that we can make
public colleges and
universities tuition-free.
We bailed them out.
Now it is their time to
help the middle class.
(APPLAUSE)
CLINTON: You know, I
think, again, both of us
share the goal of trying
to make college affordable
for all young Americans.
And I have set forth a
compact that would do just
that for
debt-free tuition.
We differ, however, on
a couple of key points.
One of them being that
if you don't have some
agreement within the
system from states and
from families and from
students, it's hard to get
to where we need to go.
And Senator Sanders's plan
really rests on making
sure that governors like
Scott Walker contribute
$23 billion on the first
day to make college free.
I am a little skeptical
about your governor
actually caring enough
about higher education to
make any kind of
commitment like that.
(APPLAUSE)
WOODRUFF: Next,
we're going to...
SANDERS: A brief response.
WOODRUFF: Very
brief, thank you.
SANDERS: Here is where we
are with public education.
A 100, 150 years ago
incredibly brave Americans
said, you know what,
working class kids, low
income kids should not
have to work in factories
or on the farms.
Like rich kids, they
deserve to get a free
education.
And that free education
of extraordinary
accomplishment was from
first grade to 12th grade.
The world has changed.
This is 2016.
In many ways, a college
degree today is equivalent
to what a high school
degree was 50, 60 years
ago.
So, yes, I do believe that
when we talk about public
education in America,
today, in a rapidly
changing world, we should
have free tuition at
public colleges
and universities.
That should be a right of
all Americans regardless
of the income of
their families.
(APPLAUSE)
WOODRUFF: Secretary
Clinton, your campaign --
you and your campaign have
made a clear appeal to
women voters.
You have talked repeatedly
about the fact, we know
you would be, if elected,
the first woman president.
But in New Hampshire
55 percent of the women
voters supported and
voted for Senator Sanders.
What are women
missing about you?
CLINTON: Well, first,
Judy, I have spent my
entire adult life working
toward making sure that
women are empowered to
make their own choices,
even if that choice
is not to vote for me.
I believe that it's most
important that we unleash
the full potential of
women and girls in our
society.
And I feel very strongly
that I have an agenda, I
have a record that really
does respond to a lot of
the specific needs that
the women in our country
face.
So I'm going to keep
making that case.
I'm going to keep making
sure that everything I've
done, everything that I
stand for is going to be
well known.
But I have no argument
with anyone making up her
mind about who to support.
I just hope that by the
end of this campaign there
will be a lot more
supporting me.
That's what I'm
working towards.
(APPLAUSE)
WOODRUFF: As you know,
just quickly, as you know,
your strong supporter,
former Secretary of State
Madeleine Albright, said
the other day that there's
a special place in Hell
for women who don't
support other women.
Do you agree with
what she said?
CLINTON: Well, look, I
think that she's been
saying that for as long as
I've known her, which is
about 25 years.
But it doesn't change
my view that we need to
empower everyone, women
and men, to make the best
decisions in their minds
that they can make.
That's what I've
always stood for.
And when it comes to the
issues that are really on
the front lines as to
whether we're going to
have equal pay, paid
family leave, some
opportunity for, you know,
women to go as far as
their hard work and talent
take them, I think that we
still have some barriers
to knock down, which is
why that's at the
core of my campaign.
I would note, just for a
historic aside, somebody
told me earlier today
we've had like 200
presidential primary
debates, and this is the
first time there have been
a majority of women on the
stage.
So, you know, we'll take
our progress wherever we
can find it.
(APPLAUSE)
WOODRUFF: Senator Sanders,
you're in the minority,
but we still want
to hear from you.
(LAUGHTER) SANDERS: Look,
we are fighting for every
vote that we can get from
women, from men, straight,
gay, African-Americans,
Latinos, Asian-Americans.
We are trying to bring
America together around an
agenda that works for
working families and the
middle class.
I am very proud, if my
memory is not correct -- I
think I am -- that I have
a lifetime -- and I've
been in Congress a few
years -- a lifetime 100
percent pro-choice
voting record.
I am very proud that over
the years we have had the
support in my state
of Vermont from very
significant
majorities of women.
I'm very proud that I
support legislation that
is currently in the
Congress, got support of
almost all progressive
Democrats in the House and
Senate, which says we will
end the absurdity of women
today making 79 cents on
the dollar compared to
men.
And we will join the
rest of the other -- the
industrialized world in
saying that paid family
and medical leave should
be a right of all working
families.
(APPLAUSE)
IFILL: Senator, do you
worry at all that you will
be the instrument of
thwarting history, as
Senator Clinton keeps
claiming, that she might
be the first
woman president?
SANDERS: Well, you know,
I think, from a historical
point of view, somebody
with my background,
somebody with my views,
somebody who has spent his
entire life taking on the
big money interests, I
think a Sanders victory
would be of some
historical
accomplishment, as well.
(APPLAUSE)
CLINTON: You know, I have
said -- I have said many
times, you know, I'm not
asking people to support
me because I'm a woman.
I'm asking people to
support me because I think
I'm the most qualified,
experienced, and ready
person to be the president
and the commander-
in-chief.
(APPLAUSE)
And I appreciate greatly
Senator Sanders' voting
record.
And I was very proud to
get the endorsement of the
Planned Parenthood Action
Fund, because I've been a
leader on these issues.
I have gone time and
time again to take on the
vested interests who would
keep women's health care
decisions the province of
the government instead of
women ourselves.
CLINTON: I'm very proud
that NARAL endorsed me
because when it comes to
it we need a leader on
women's issues.
Somebody who, yes, votes
right, but much more than
that, leads the efforts
to protect the hard-fought
gains that women have
made, that, make no
mistake about it, are
under tremendous attack,
not just by the Republican
presidential candidates
but by a whole national
effort to try to set back
women's rights.
So I'm asking women, I'm
asking men, to support me
because I'm ready to go
into the White House on
January 20th, 2017 and get
to work on both domestic
and foreign
policy challenges.
(APPLAUSE)
WOODRUFF: Final comment.
SANDERS: Let me concur
with the secretary, no
question women's rights
are under fierce attack
all over this country.
And I will tell you
something that really
galls me.
I will not shock anybody
to suggest that in
politics there is
occasionally a little bit
of hypocrisy.
Just a little bit.
All over this country we
have Republican candidates
for president saying
we hate the government.
Government is the enemy.
We're going to cut Social
Security to help you.
We're going to cut
Medicare and Medicaid,
federal aid to education
to help you, because the
government is so terrible.
But, by the way, when it
comes to a woman having to
make a very personal
choice, ah, in that case,
my Republican colleagues
love the government and
want the government to
make that choice for every
woman in America.
If that's not hypocrisy, I
don't know what hypocrisy
is.
(APPLAUSE)
IFILL: Thank you both.
IFILL: We turn now to the
first of several questions
from our partners
at Facebook.
They were selected from
a curated group of people
we've been following
of undecided voters.
The first comes from
Claudia Looze, a
54-year-old woman who
works as a program manager
at a public affairs
cable network in Madison,
Wisconsin.
And she writes: "Wisconsin
is number one in
African-American male
incarceration, according
to a University of
Wisconsin study.
They found that
Wisconsin's incarceration
rate for black men, which
is at 13 percent, was
nearly double the
country's rate.
What can we do across the
nation to address this?"
Senator Sanders.
SANDERS: This is one of
the great tragedies in our
country today.
And we can no longer
continue to sweep it under
the rug.
It has to be dealt with.
Today a male
African-American baby born
today stands a one-in-four
chance of ending up in
jail.
That is beyond
unspeakable.
So what we have to do is
the radical reform of a
broken criminal
justice system.
(APPLAUSE)
SANDERS: What we have to
do is end over-policing in
African- American
neighborhoods.
The reality is that both
the African-American
community and the white
community do marijuana at
about equal rates.
The reality is four
times as many blacks get
arrested for marijuana.
Truth is that far more
blacks get stopped for
traffic violations.
The truth is that
sentencing for blacks is
higher than for whites.
We need fundamental police
reform, clearly, clearly,
when we talk about a
criminal justice system.
I would hope that we could
all agree that we are sick
and tired of seeing videos
on television of unarmed
people, often
African-Americans, shot by
police officers.
What we have got to do
is make it clear that any
police officer who breaks
the law will, in fact, be
held accountable.
(APPLAUSE)
CLINTON: You know, I
completely agree with
Senator Sanders.
The first speech I gave
in this campaign back in
April was about criminal
justice reform and ending
the era of mass
incarceration.
The statistics from
Wisconsin are particularly
troubling, because it
is the highest rate of
incarceration for
African-Americans in our
nation, twice the
national average.
And we know of the tragic,
terrible event that lead
to the death of Dontre
Hamilton right here in
Milwaukee, a young man
unarmed, who should still
be with us.
His family certainly
believes that.
And so do I.
So we have work to do.
There have been some good
recommendations about what
needs to happen.
President Obama's policing
commission came out with
some.
I have fully
endorsed those.
CLINTON: But we have to
restore policing that will
actually protect the
communities that police
officers are
sworn to protect.
And, then we have to go
after sentencing, and
that's one of the problems
here in Wisconsin because
so much of what happened
in the criminal justice
system doesn't happen
at the federal level, it
happens at the state
and local level.
But, I would
also add this.
There are other
racial discrepancies.
Really systemic racism in
this state, as in others,
education, in employment,
in the kinds of factors
that too often lead from
a position where young
people, particularly young
men, are pushed out of
school early, are denied
employment opportunities.
So, when we talk about
criminal justice reform,
and ending the era of mass
incarceration, we also
have to talk about jobs,
education, housing, and
other ways of
helping communities.
(APPLAUSE)
SANDERS: Nothing that
Secretary Clinton said do
I disagree with.
This mandatory sentencing,
a very bad idea.
It takes away
discretion from judges.
We have got to
demilitarize local police
departments so they do
not look like occupying
armies.
(APPLAUSE)
We have got to make
sure that local police
departments look like the
communities they serve in
their diversity.
And, where we are failing
abysmally is in the very
high rate of
recidivism we see.
People are being released
from jail without the
education, without the
job training, without the
resources that they
need to get their lives
together, then they end up
-- we're shocked that they
end up back in jail again.
So, we have a lot
of work to do.
But, here is a pledge
I've made throughout this
campaign, and it's really
not a very radical pledge.
When we have more
people in jail,
disproportionately African
American and Latino, than
China does, a communist
authoritarian society four
times our size.
Here's my promise, at the
end of my first term as
president we will not have
more people in jail than
any other country.
We will invest in
education, and jobs for
our kids, not
incarceration and more
jails.
(APPLAUSE) WOODRUFF:
Secretary Clinton, I was
talking recently with a 23
year old black woman who
voted for President Obama
because she said she
thought relations between
the races would get better
under his leadership,
and his example.
Hardly anyone believes
that they have.
Why do you think race
relations would be better
under a Clinton
presidency?
What would you do that
the nation's first African
American has not
been able to?
CLINTON: Well, I'm
just not sure I agree
completely with
that assessment.
I think under President
Obama we have seen a lot
of advances, the
Affordable Care Act has
helped more African
Americans than any other
group to get insurance, to
be taken care of, but we
also know a lot
more than we did.
We have a lot more social
media, we have everybody
with a cellphone.
So, we are seeing the
dark side of the remaining
systemic racism that we
have to root out in our
society.
I think President Obama
has set a great example.
I think he has addressed
a lot of these issues that
have been quite difficult,
but he has gone forward.
Now, what we have to do
is to build on an honest
conversation about
where we go next.
We now have much more
information about what
must be done to fix our
criminal justice system.
We now have some good
models about how better to
provide employment,
housing and education.
I think what President
Obama did was to exemplify
the importance of this
issue as our first African
American president, and to
address it both from the
President's office, and
through his advocacy, such
as working with young men,
and Mrs. Obama's work with
young women.
But, we can't rest.
We have work to do, and we
now know a lot more than
we ever did before.
So, it's going to be my
responsibility to make
sure we move forward to
solve these problems that
are now out in the open.
Nobody can deny them.
To use the Justice
Department, as we just
saw, they have said they
are going to sue Ferguson,
that entered into a
consent agreement, and
then tried to back out.
So, we're going to enforce
the law, we're going to
change policing practices,
we're going to change
incarceration practices,
but we're also going to
emphasize education,
jobs, and housing.
(APPLAUSE)
WOODRUFF: Senator Sanders?
SANDERS: Well, I think,
Judy, what has to be
appreciated is that, as a
result of the disastrous
and illegal behavior on
Wall Street, millions of
lives were hurt.
People lost their jobs,
their homes, their life
savings.
Turns out that the
African-American community
and the Latino community
were hit especially hard.
As I understand it, the
African-American community
lost half of their wealth
as a result of the Wall
Street collapse.
So when you have childhood
African-American poverty
rates of 35 percent,
when you have youth
unemployment at 51
percent, when you have
unbelievable rates of
incarceration -- which, by
the way, leaves the
children back home without
a dad or even a mother --
clearly, we are looking at
institutional racism.
We are looking at an
economy in which the rich
get richer and the
poor get poorer.
And sadly, in America
today, in our economy, a
whole lot of those
poor people are
African-American.
WOODRUFF: So race relation
was be better under a
Sanders presidency
than they've been?
SANDERS: Absolutely,
because what we will do is
say, instead of giving tax
breaks to billionaires, we
are going to create
millions of jobs for
low-income kids so they're
not hanging out on street
corners.
We're going to make sure
that those kids stay in
school or are able to
get a college education.
And I think when you
give low-income kids --
African-American, white,
Latino kids -- the
opportunities to get their
lives together, they are
not going to
end up in jail.
They're going to end up
in the productive economy,
which is where
we want them.
(APPLAUSE)
IFILL: Let me turn this on
its head, because when we
talk about race in this
country, we always talk
about African-Americans,
people of color.
I want to talk about
white people, OK?
SANDERS: White people?
IFILL: I know.
(LAUGHTER)
So many people will be
surprised to find out that
we are sitting in one
of the most racially
polarized metropolitan
areas in the country.
By the middle of this
century, the nation is
going to be
majority nonwhite.
Our public schools
are already there.
If working- class, white
Americans are about to be
outnumbered, are already
underemployed in many
cases, and one study found
they are dying sooner,
don't they have a reason
to be resentful, Senator
-- Secretary Clinton?
CLINTON: Look, I am deeply
concerned about what's
happening in every
community in America, and
that includes white
communities, where we are
seeing an increase in
alcoholism, addiction,
earlier deaths.
People with a high school
education or less are not
even living as long as
their parents lived.
This is a remarkable
and horrifying fact.
And that's why I've come
forward with, for example,
a plan to revitalize coal
country, the coalfield
communities that have
been so hard hit by the
changing economy, by the
reduction in the use of
coal.
You know, coal miners and
their families who helped
turn on the lights and
power our factories for
generations are now
wondering, has our country
forgotten us?
Do people not care about
all of our sacrifice?
And I'm going to do
everything I can to
address distressed
communities, whether they
are communities of color,
whether they are white
communities, whether they
are in any part of our
country.
I particularly appreciate
the proposal that
Congressman Jim Clyburn
has -- the 10-20-30
proposal -- to try to
spend more federal dollars
in communities with
persistent generational
poverty.
And you know what?
If you look at the
numbers, there are
actually as many, if not
more white communities
that are truly being
left behind and left out.
So, yes, I do think
it would be a terrible
oversight not to try to
address the very real
problems that white
Americans -- particularly
those without a lot of
education whose jobs have
-- you know, no longer
provided them or even no
longer present in their
communities, because we
have to focus where
the real hurt is.
And that's why, as
president, I will look at
communities that need
special help and try to
deliver that.
(APPLAUSE)
IFILL: Senator -- Senator,
I want you to respond to
that, but I also want
you to -- am I wrong?
Is it even right to be
describing this as a
matter of race?
SANDERS: Yeah, you can,
because African-Americans
and Latinos not only
face the general economic
crises of low wages, and
high unemployment, and
poor educational
opportunities, but they
face other
problems, as well.
So, yes, we can talk about
it as a racial issue.
But it is a general
economic issue.
SANDERS: And here's what
the economic issue is.
The wages that high school
graduates receive today
are significantly less,
whether you are white or
black, than
they used to be.
Why is that?
Because of a series of
disastrous trade policies
which have allowed
corporate America through
NAFTA and Permanent Normal
Trade Relations with
China, Secretary Clinton
and I disagree on those
issues.
But view is those trade
policies have enabled
corporate America to shut
down in this country,
throw millions of people
out on the street.
Now no one thinks that
working in the factory is
the greatest job
in the world.
But you know what, you can
make a middle class wage,
you have decent health
care, decent benefits.
You once had a pension.
Those jobs, in many
cases, are now gone.
They're off to China.
Now you are a worker,
white worker, black
worker, who had a decent
job, that manufacturing
job is gone.
What have you got now?
You are working
at McDonald's?
That is why there is
massive despair all over
this country.
People have worked
their entire lives.
They're making a half,
two-thirds what they used
to make.
Their kids are having a
hard time finding any work
at all.
And that's why this study,
which shows that if you
can believe it today, for
white working class people
between 45 and 54, life
expectancy is actually
going down.
Suicide, alcoholism,
drugs, that's why we need
to start paying attention
to the needs of working
families in this country,
and not just a handful of
billionaires who have
enormous economic and
political power.
(APPLAUSE)
WOODRUFF: Thank you.
Senator Sanders, one of
the causes of anxiety for
working class Americans is
connected to immigrants.
President Obama, as you
know, has issued executive
actions to permit some
5 million undocumented
immigrants who are living
now in the United States
to come out of the
shadows without fear of
deportation to
get work permits.
Would you go
further than that?
And if so, how
specifically would you do
it?
Should an undocumented
family watching this
debate tonight, say, in
Nevada, rest easy, not
fear of further
deportations under a
Sanders presidency?
SANDERS: The
answer is yes.
We've got 11 million
undocumented people in
this country.
I have talked to some of
the young kids with tears
rolling down their cheeks,
are scared to death that
today they may or their
parents may be deported.
I believe that we have
got to pass comprehensive
immigration reform,
something that I strongly
supported.
I believe that we have
got to move toward a path
toward citizenship.
I agree with President
Obama who used executive
orders to protect families
because the Congress, the
House was unable
or refused to act.
And in fact I
would go further.
What would motivate me and
what would be the guiding
light for me in terms of
immigration reform, Judy,
is to bring families
together, not divide them
up.
And let me say this also.
Somebody who is very fond
of the president, agrees
with him most of the time,
I disagree with his recent
deportation policies.
And I would not
support those.
Bottom line is a path
towards citizenship for 11
million undocumented
people, if Congress
doesn't do the right
thing, we use the
executive orders
of the president.
(APPLAUSE)
CLINTON: I strongly
support the president's
executive actions.
I hope the Supreme
Court upholds them.
I think there is
constitutional and legal
authority for the
president to have done
what he did.
I am against the raids.
I'm against the kind of
inhumane treatment that is
now being visited upon
families, waking them up
in the middle of the
night, rounding them up.
We should be deporting
criminals, not hardworking
immigrant families who do
the very best they can and
often are keeping
economies going in many
places in our country.
I'm a strong supporter of
comprehensive immigration
reform.
Have been ever since
I was in the Senate.
I was one of the original
sponsors of the DREAM Act.
I voted for comprehensive
immigration reform in
2007.
Senator Sanders voted
against it at that time.
Because I think we have
to get to comprehensive
immigration reform with
a path to citizenship.
And as president I would
expand enormous energy,
literally call every
member of Congress that I
thought I could persuade.
Hopefully after the 2016
election, some of the
Republicans will come to
their senses and realize
we are not going to deport
11 or 12 million people in
this country.
And they will work with
me to get comprehensive
immigration reform.
(APPLAUSE)
SANDERS: Secretary
Clinton, I do have a
disagreement here.
If my memory is correct, I
think when we saw children
coming from these
horrendous, horrendously
violent areas of Honduras
and neighboring countries,
people who are fleeing
drug violence and cartel
violence, I thought it was
a good idea to allow those
children to stay
in this country.
That was not, as I
understand it, the
secretary's position.
In terms of 2007
immigration reform, yeah,
I did vote against it.
I voted against it because
the Southern Poverty Law
Center, among other
groups, said that the
guest-worker programs
that were embedded in this
agreement were
akin to slavery.
Akin to slavery, where
people came into this
country to do guest
work were abused, were
exploited, and if they
stood up for their rights,
they'd be thrown
out of this country.
So it wasn't just
me who opposed it.
It was LULAC, one of the
large Latino organizations
in this country.
It was the AFL-CIO.
It was some of the most
progressive members of the
United States Congress
who opposed it for that
reason.
But we are where
we are right now.
And where we are right now
is we have got to stand up
to the Trumps of the world
who are trying to divide
us up.
What we have to do right
now is bring our people
together and understand
that we must provide a
path towards citizenship
for 11 million
undocumented people.
CLINTON: Two
quick responses.
One, with respect to the
Central American children,
I made it very clear that
those children needed to
be processed
appropriately, but we also
had to send a message to
families and communities
in Central America not
to send their children on
this dangerous journey in
the hands of smugglers.
I've also called for the
end of family detention,
for the end of
privately-run detention
centers, along with
private prisons, which I
think are really against
the common good and the
rule of law.
And with respect to the
2007 bill, this was Ted
Kennedy's bill.
And I think Ted Kennedy
had a very clear idea
about what needed
to be done.
And I was proud to stand
with him and support it.
(APPLAUSE)
WOODRUFF: I'd like...
SANDERS: Well, let
me just respond.
I worked with Ted Kennedy.
He was the chairman
of my committee.
And I loved Ted Kennedy.
But on this issue, when
you have one of the large
Latino organizations in
America saying vote no,
and you have the AFL-CIO
saying vote no, and you
have leading progressive
Democrats, in fact, voting
no, I don't apologize
for that vote.
But in terms of the
children, I don't know to
whom you're
sending a message.
Who are you sending
a message to?
These are children who
are leaving countries and
neighborhoods where
their lives are at stake.
That was the fact.
I don't think we use
them to send a message.
I think we welcome them
into this country and do
the best we can to help
them get their lives
together.
(APPLAUSE)
CLINTON: Well, that just
wasn't -- that just wasn't
the fact, Senator.
The fact is that there was
a great effort made by the
Obama administration and
others to really send a
clear message, because we
knew that so many of these
children were being
abused, being treated
terribly while they tried
to get to our border.
So we have a
disagreement on this.
I think now what I've
called for is counsel for
every child so that no
child has to face any kind
of process without someone
who speaks and advocates
for that child so that the
right decision hopefully
can be made.
(APPLAUSE)
IFILL: If you would allow
me now to move on, we've
been talking
about children.
I want to talk
about seniors.
That takes us to our
second Facebook question
from Farheen Hakeem, who
writes, "My father" --
she's a 40-year-old woman
who works for a nonprofit
here in Milwaukee.
And she writes, "My father
gets just $16 in food
assistance per month as
part of Medicaid's family
community program in
Milwaukee County for
low-income seniors.
How will you as president
work to ensure low-income
seniors get their
basic needs met?"
Start with you,
Senator Sanders.
SANDERS: OK.
You know, you judge a
nation not by the number
of millionaires and
billionaires it has, but
by how you treat, we
treat, the most vulnerable
and fragile people
in our nation.
And by those standards,
we're not doing
particularly well.
SANDERS: We have the
highest rate of childhood
poverty among almost any
major country on Earth.
And in terms of seniors,
there are millions of
seniors -- and I've talked
to them in my state of
Vermont and all over this
country -- who are trying
to get by on $11,000,
$12,000, $13,000 a year
Social Security.
And you know what?
You do the arithmetic.
You can't get by on
$11,000, $12,000, $13,000
a year.
And here's an area where
Secretary Clinton and I
believe we have
a difference.
I have long supported the
proposition that we should
lift the cap on taxable
income coming into the
Social Security Trust
Fund, starting at
$250,000.
(APPLAUSE)
And when we -- and when we
do that, we don't do what
the Republicans want,
which is to cut Social
Security.
We do what the American
people want, to expand
Social Security by $1,300
a year for people under
$16,000, and we extend the
life of Social Security
for 58 years.
Yes, the wealthiest
people, the top 1.5
percent, will pay
more in taxes.
But a great nation like
ours should not be in a
position where elderly
people are cutting their
pills in half, where
they don't have decent
nutrition, where they
can't heat their homes in
the wintertime.
That is not what
America should be about.
If elected president, I
will do everything I can
to expand Social Security
benefits, not just for
seniors, but for disabled
veterans, as well.
(APPLAUSE)
CLINTON: I think -- I
think it's fair to say we
don't have a disagreement.
We both believe there has
to be more money going
into the Social
Security system.
I've said I'm looking at a
couple of different ways,
one which you mentioned,
Senator, but also trying
to expand the existing
tax to passive income that
wealthy people have
so that we do get more
revenue into the Social
Security Trust Fund.
I have a slightly
different approach,
though, about what we
should do with that
initially.
First, rather than expand
benefits for everyone, I
do want to take care of
low-income seniors who
worked at low-wage jobs.
I want to take
care of women.
When the Social Security
program was started in the
1930s, not very
many women worked.
And women have been
disadvantaged ever since.
They do not get any credit
for their care-taking
responsibilities.
And the people who are
often the most hard-hit
are widows, because when
their spouse dies, they
can lose up to one-half
of their Social Security
monthly payment.
So we have no disagreement
about the need to buttress
Social Security, get more
revenue into the program.
But I want to start by
helping those people who
are most at risk, the
ones who, yes, are cutting
their pills in half, who
don't believe they can
make the rent, who are
worried about what comes
next for them.
SANDERS: In all
due respect...
(APPLAUSE)
SANDERS: In all due
respect, Secretary
Clinton, a lot of the
progressive groups, the
online groups have
really asked you a simple
question.
Are you coming
onboard a proposal?
And what is that proposal?
Now, the proposal that I
have outlined, you know,
should be familiar to
you, because it is what
essentially Barack Obama
campaigned on in 2008.
You opposed him then.
I would hope that you
would come onboard and say
that this is the simple
and straightforward thing
to do.
We're asking the top 1.5
percent, including passive
income, to start paying
a little bit more so that
the elderly and disabled
vets in this country can
live with security
and dignity.
I hope you will make a
decision soon on this.
CLINTON: Well, Senator,
look, I think we're in
vigorous agreement here.
We both want to get
more revenue in.
I have yet to see a
proposal that you're
describing that the --
raising the cap would
apply to passive income.
That has not been...
SANDERS: That's my bill.
Check it out.
CLINTON: Well, that has
not been a part of most of
the proposals
that I've seen.
I'm interested in making
sure we get the maximum
amount of revenue from
those who can well afford
to provide it.
So I'm going to come up
with the best way forward.
We're going to end
up in the same place.
We're going to
get more revenue.
I'm going to prioritize
those recipients who need
the most help first.
(APPLAUSE)
WOODRUFF: We're
going to move on.
Secretary Clinton, your
campaign has recently
ramped up criticism
of Senator Sanders for
attending Democratic Party
fundraisers from which you
say he benefited.
But nearly half of your
financial sector donations
appear to come from just
two wealthy financiers,
George Soros and Donald
Sussman, for a total of
about $10 million.
WOODRUFF: You have said
that there's no quid pro
quo involved.
Is that also true of the
donations that wealthy
Republicans give to
Republican candidates,
contributors including
the Koch Brothers?
CLINTON: I can't speak for
the Koch Brothers, you're
referring to a Super PAC
that we don't coordinate
with, that was set up to
support President Obama,
that has now decided that
they want to support me.
They are the ones who
should respond to any
questions.
Let's talk about
our campaigns.
I'm very proud of the fact
that we have more than 750
thousand donors, and the
vast majority of them are
giving small
contributions.
So, I'm proud of
Senator Sanders, and his
supporters.
I think it's great that
Senator Sanders, President
Obama and I have more
donors than any three
people who have every
run, certainly on the
Democratic side.
That's the way it should
be, and I'm going to
continue to reach out
to thank all my online
contributors for
everything they are doing
for me, to encourage them
and help me do more just
as Senator Sanders is.
I think that is
the real key here.
We both have a lot
of small donors.
I think that sets us
apart from a lot of what's
happening right now on
the Republican side.
The Koch Brothers have
a very clear political
agenda.
It is an agenda, in my
view, that would do great
harm to our country.
We're going to fight it as
hard as we can, and we're
going to fight whoever the
Republicans nominate who
will depend on the Koch
Brothers, and others.
(APPLAUSE)
WOODRUFF: I'm asking if
Democratic donors are
different than
Republican donors.
SANDERS: What we are
talking about in reality
is a corrupt campaign
finance system, that's
what we're talking about.
We have to be
honest about it.
It is undermining
American democracy.
When extraordinarily
wealthy people make very
large contributions to
Super PACs, and in many
cases in this campaign,
Super PACs have raised
more money than individual
candidates have, OK?
We had a decision to make
early on, do we do a Super
PAC?
And, we said no.
We don't represent Wall
Street, we don't represent
the billionaire class, so
it ends up I'm the only
candidate up here of the
many candidates who has no
Super PAC.
But, what we did is
we said to the working
families of this country,
look, we know things are
tough, but if you want
to help us go beyond
establishment politics,
and establishment
economics, send
us something.
And, it turns out that
up until -- and this has
blown me away, never in a
million years would I have
believed that I would
be standing here tonight
telling you that we have
received three and a half
million individual
contributions from well
over a million people.
Now, Secretary Clinton's
Super PAC, as I understand
it, received $25 million
dollars last reporting
period, $15 million
dollars from Wall Street.
Our average contribution
is $27 dollars, I'm very
proud of that.
(APPLAUSE)
IFILL: Senator Sanders,
are you saying...
CLINTON: We are mixing
apples and oranges.
My 750,000 donors have
contributed more than a
million and a
half donations.
I'm very proud.
That, I think, between the
two of us demonstrates the
strength of the support we
have among people who want
to see change
in our country.
But, the real issue, I
think, that the Senator is
injecting into this is
that if you had a Super
PAC, like President Obama
has, which now says it
wants to support me.
It's not my PAC.
If you take donations from
Wall Street, you can't be
independent.
I would just say, I
debated then Senator Obama
numerous times on stages
like this, and he was the
recipient of the largest
number of Wall Street
donations of anybody
running on the Democratic
side ever.
Now, when it mattered, he
stood up and took on Wall
Street.
He pushed through, and
he passed the Dodd-Frank
regulation, the toughest
regulations since the
1930's.
So, let's not in anyway
imply here that either
President Obama or myself,
would in anyway not take
on any vested interested,
whether it's Wall Street,
or drug companies, or
insurance companies, or
frankly, the gun lobby to
stand up to do what's best
for the American people.
(APPLAUSE)
SANDERS: The
people aren't dumb.
Why in God's name
does Wall Street...
(APPLAUSE)
But let's not -- but let's
not -- let's not insult --
let's not insult the
intelligence of the
American people.
People aren't dumb.
Why in God's name does
Wall Street make huge
campaign contributions?
I guess just for the fun
of it; they want to throw
money around.
(LAUGHTER)
Why does the
pharmaceutical industry
make huge campaign
contributions?
Any connection maybe to
the fact that our people
pay the highest prices in
the world for prescription
drugs?
Why does the fossil fuel
industry pay -- spend huge
amounts of money on
campaign contributions?
Any connection to the fact
that not one Republican
candidate for president
thinks and agrees with the
scientific community that
climate change is real and
that we have got to
transform our energy
system?
(APPLAUSE)
And when we talk about
Wall Street, let's talk
about Wall Street.
I voted for Dodd-Frank,
got an important amendment
in it.
In my view, it doesn't go
anywhere near far enough.
But when we talk about
Wall Street, you have Wall
Street and major banks
have paid $200 billion in
fines since the
great crash.
No Wall Street executive
has been prosecuted.
(APPLAUSE)
CLINTON: Well, let's just
-- let's just follow up on
this, because, you know,
I've made it very clear
that no bank is too big
to fail, no executive too
powerful to jail, and
because of Dodd-Frank, we
now have in law a process
that the president, the
Federal Reserve, and
others can use if any bank
poses a systemic risk.
I think that's a
major accomplishment.
I agree, however, it
doesn't go far enough,
because what it focuses on
are the big banks, which
Senator Sanders has talked
about a lot, for good
reason.
I go further in the plan
that I've proposed, which
has been called the
toughest, most effective,
comprehensive plan for
reining in the other risks
that the financial
system could face.
It was an investment bank,
Lehman Brothers, that
contributed to
our collapse.
It was a big insurance
company, AIG.
It was Countrywide
Mortgage.
My plan would sweep all
of them into a regulatory
framework so we can try to
get ahead of what the next
problems might be.
And I believe that not
only Barney Frank, Paul
Krugman, and others, have
said that what I have
proposed is the
most effective.
It goes in the
right direction.
We have Dodd-Frank.
We can use it to break
up the banks, if that's
appropriate.
But let's not
kid ourselves.
As we speak, there are new
problems on the horizon.
I want to get ahead of
those, and that's why I've
proposed a much more
comprehensive approach to
deal with all of these...
(CROSSTALK)
(APPLAUSE)
WOODRUFF: We have
to go to a break.
We...
SANDERS: Let me, you
know, again, respectfully
disagree with
Secretary Clinton here.
When you have three out of
the four largest financial
institutions in this
country bigger today than
they were when we bailed
them out because they were
too big to fail, when
you have six financial
institutions having assets
equivalent to 58 percent
of the GDP of America,
while issuing two-thirds
of the credit cards and
a third of the mortgages,
look, I think if Teddy
Roosevelt were alive
today, that great
trust-buster would have
said break them up.
I think he would
have been right.
I think he would have said
bring back a 21st-century
Glass-Steagall
legislation.
I think that would have
been right, as well.
That's my view.
(APPLAUSE)
WOODRUFF: All right.
Thank you both.
It is time for a break.
And when we come back,
we're going to turn to
some new topics, including
how these candidates will
keep America safe.
IFILL: There's a lot more
to come in just a few
minutes.
Stay with us for more
of the PBS NewsHour
Democratic Debate.
(BREAK)
WOODRUFF: Welcome
back to the Democratic
presidential debate.
Before we return to our
questions, we have a
follow-up question from
our Facebook group.
And it is to
Senator Sanders.
Senator, it comes
from Bill Corfield.
He is a 55-year-old
musician from Troy, Ohio.
And he asks: "Are there
any areas of government
you would like to reduce?"
SANDERS: Hey, I'm in the
United States Senate, and
anyone who doesn't think
that there is an enormous
amount of waste and
inefficiency and
bureaucracy throughout
government would be very,
very mistaken.
I believe in government,
but I believe in efficient
government, not
wasteful government.
IFILL: How about you,
Senator Clinton --
Secretary Clinton?
CLINTON: Absolutely.
And, you know, there are a
number of programs that I
think are duplicative
and redundant and not
producing the results
that people deserve.
There are a lot of
training programs and
education programs that I
think can be streamlined
and put into a much better
format so that if we do
continue them they can
be more useful, in public
schools, community
colleges, and colleges and
universities.
I would like to take a
hard look at every part of
the federal government
and really do the kind of
analysis that would
rebuild some confidence in
people that we're taking
a hard look about what we
have, you know, and what
we don't need anymore.
And that's what
I intend to do.
SANDERS: If I could just
answer that, we have also
got to take a look at the
waste and inefficiencies
in the Department of
Defense, which is the one
major agency of government
that has not been able to
be audited.
And I have the feeling
you're going to find a lot
of cost overruns there
and a lot of waste and
duplicative activities.
(APPLAUSE)
IFILL: We spent the
first part of this debate
talking about
domestic insecurity.
The second part, we want
to talk about our foreign
policy insecurities.
And we want to start
with a question for you,
Secretary Clinton, about
America's role in the
world.
Americans are becoming
increasingly worried that
attacks abroad are coming
home, that they already
are, in fact, here.
According to exit polls
from last week, from
earlier this week, more
than two- thirds of
Democrats in New Hampshire
are concerned about
sending their children to
fight in wars they can't
win.
They fret that the next
attack is just around the
corner and we
are not ready.
Are we?
CLINTON: Look, I think we
are readier than we used
to be, but it's a constant
effort that has to be
undertaken to make sure we
are as ready as we need to
be.
We have made a lot of
improvements in our
domestic security since
9/11, and we have been
able to foil and prevent
attacks, yet we see the
terrible attack in San
Bernardino and know that
we haven't done enough.
So we have to go after
this both abroad and at
home.
We have to go after
terrorist networks,
predominantly ISIS --
that's not the only one,
but let's focus on
that for a minute.
We have to lead a
coalition that will take
back territory from ISIS.
That is principally an
American-led air campaign
that we are
now engaged in.
We have to support the
fighters on the ground,
principally the Arabs and
the Kurds who are willing
to stand up and take
territory back from Raqqa
to Ramadi.
We have to continue to
work with the Iraqi army
so that they are better
prepared to advance on
some of the other
strongholds inside Iraq,
like Mosul, when they
are able to do so.
And we have to cut off the
flow of foreign funding
and foreign fighters.
And we have to take
on ISIS online.
They are a sophisticated
purveyor of propaganda, a
celebrator of violence,
an instigator of attacks
using their
online presence.
Here at home, we've
got to do a better job
coordinating between
federal, state, and local
law enforcement.
We need the best possible
intelligence not only from
our own sources, but from
sources overseas, that can
be a real-time fusion
effort to get information
where it's needed.
But the final thing I want
to say about this is the
following.
You know, after 9/11, one
of the efforts that we did
in New York was if you
see something or hear
something suspicious,
report it.
And we need to do that
throughout the country.
But we need to understand
that American Muslims are
on the front line
of our defense.
They are more likely to
know what's happening in
their families and their
communities, and they need
to feel not just invited,
but welcomed within the
American society.
So when somebody like
Donald Trump and others...
(APPLAUSE)
... stirs up the
demagoguery against
American Muslims,
that hurts us at home.
It's not only offensive;
it's dangerous.
And the same goes for
overseas, where we have to
put together a coalition
of Muslim nations.
I know how to do that.
I put together the
coalition that imposed the
sanctions on Iran that
got us to the negotiating
table to put a lid on
their nuclear weapons
program.
(APPLAUSE)
And you don't go tell
Muslim nations you want
them to be part of a
coalition when you have a
leading candidate for
president of the United
States who insults
their religion.
So this has to be looked
at overall, and we have to
go at it from every
possible angle.
IFILL: Senator Sanders...
SANDERS: Let me
just say this.
What a president of the
United States has got to
do -- and what is his
or her major, I think,
responsibility -- is to,
A, make certain that we
keep our people safe, that
we work with allies around
the world to protect...
... president of the
United States has got to
do, and what is his
or her major, I think,
responsibility, is to, A,
make certain that we keep
our people safe.
That we work with allies
around the world to
protect democratic values.
That we do all that we can
to create a world of peace
and prosperity.
I voted against the war
in Iraq because I listened
very carefully to what
President Bush and Vice
President Cheney had to
say and I didn't believe
them.
And if you go to my Web
site, berniesanders.com,
what you find is not only
going to help lead the
opposition to that war,
but much of what I feared
would happen when I spoke
on the floor of the House,
in fact, did happen in
terms of the instability
that occurred.
Now I think an area in
kind of a vague way, or
not so vague, where
Secretary Clinton and I
disagree is the area
of regime change.
Look, the truth is that a
powerful nation like the
United States, certainly
working with our allies,
we can overthrow dictators
all over the world.
And God only knows Saddam
Hussein was a brutal
dictator.
We could overthrow Assad
tomorrow if we wanted to.
We got rid of Gadhafi.
But the point about
foreign policy is not just
to know that you can
overthrow a terrible
dictator, it's to
understand what happens
the day after.
And in Libya, for example,
the United States,
Secretary Clinton, as
secretary of state,
working with some other
countries, did get rid of
a terrible dictator
named Gadhafi.
But what happened is
a political vacuum
developed.
ISIS came in, and now
occupies significant
territory in Libya, and
is now prepared, unless we
stop them, to have a
terrorist foothold.
But this is nothing new.
This has gone on 50 or
60 years where the United
States has been
involved in overthrowing
governments.
Mossadegh back in 1953.
Nobody knows who
Mossadegh was,
democratically-elected
prime minister of Iran.
He was overthrown by
British and American
interests because he
threatened oil interests
of the British.
And as a result of that,
the shah of Iran came in,
terrible dictator.
The result of that, you
had the Iranian Revolution
coming in, and that
is where we are today.
Unintended consequences.
So I believe as president
I will look very carefully
about unintended
consequences.
I will do everything I can
to make certain that the
United States and our
brave men and women in the
military do not get bogged
down in perpetual warfare
in the Middle East.
(APPLAUSE)
CLINTON: If I
could just respond.
Two points.
One, Senator Sanders voted
in 1998 on what I think is
fair to call a regime
change resolution with
respect to Iraq, calling
for the end of Saddam
Hussein's regime.
He voted in favor of
regime change with Libya,
voted in favor of the
Security Council being an
active participate in
setting the parameters for
what we would do, which of
course we followed through
on.
I do not believe a vote in
2002 is a plan to defeat
ISIS in 2016.
It's very important we
focus on the threats we
face today, and that we
understand the complicated
and dangerous
world we are in.
When people go to vote
in primaries or caucuses,
they are voting not only
for the president, they
are voting for the
commander-in- chief.
And it's important that
people really look hard at
what the threats and
dangers we face are, and
who is best prepared
for dealing with them.
As we all remember,
Senator Obama, when he ran
against me, was against
the war in Iraq.
And yet when he won, he
turned to me, trusting my
judgment, my experience,
to become secretary of
state.
I was very honored to be
asked to do that and very
honored to serve with him
those first four years.
(APPLAUSE)
SANDERS: Judy, if I can,
there is no question,
Secretary Clinton and I
are friends, and I have a
lot of respect for her,
that she has enormous
experience in
foreign affairs.
Secretary of state
for four years.
You've got a bit of
experience, I would
imagine.
But judgment
matters as well.
Judgment matters as well.
And she and I looked at
the same evidence coming
from the Bush
administration regarding
Iraq.
I lead the opposition
against it.
She voted for it.
But more importantly,
in terms of this Libya
resolution that you have
noted before, this was a
virtually
unanimous consent.
Everybody voted for it
wanting to see Libya move
toward democracy, of
course we all wanted to do
that.
SANDERS: That is very
different than talking
about specific action for
regime change, which I did
not support.
CLINTON: You did
support a U.N.
Security Council approach,
which we did follow up on.
And, look, I think it's
important to look at what
the most important
counterterrorism judgment
of the first four years of
the Obama administration
was, and that was the very
difficult decision as to
whether or not to advise
the president to go after
bin Laden.
I looked at the evidence.
I looked at the
intelligence.
I got the briefings.
I recommended that the
president go forward.
It was a hard choice.
Not all of his top
national security advisors
agreed with that.
And at the end of the day,
it was the president's
decision.
So he had to leave the
Situation Room after
hearing from the small
group advising him and he
had to make that decision.
I'm proud that I
gave him that advice.
And I'm very grateful to
the brave Navy SEALs who
carried out that mission.
(APPLAUSE)
SANDERS: Judy, one
area very briefly...
WOODRUFF: Just
a final word.
SANDERS: Where the
secretary and I have a
very profound difference,
in the last debate -- and
I believe in her book --
very good book, by the way
-- in her book and in this
last debate, she talked
about getting the approval
or the support or the
mentoring of
Henry Kissinger.
Now, I find it rather
amazing, because I happen
to believe that Henry
Kissinger was one of the
most destructive
secretaries of state in
the modern history
of this country.
(APPLAUSE)
I am proud to say that
Henry Kissinger is not my
friend.
I will not take advice
from Henry Kissinger.
And in fact, Kissinger's
actions in Cambodia, when
the United States bombed
that country, overthrew
Prince Sihanouk, created
the instability for Pol
Pot and the Khmer Rouge
to come in, who then
butchered some 3 million
innocent people, one of
the worst genocides in
the history of the world.
So count me in as somebody
who will not be listening
to Henry Kissinger.
(APPLAUSE)
IFILL: Secretary Clinton?
CLINTON: Well, I know
journalists have asked who
you do listen to on
foreign policy, and we
have yet to know
who that is.
SANDERS: Well, it
ain't Henry Kissinger.
That's for sure.
CLINTON: That's fine.
That's fine.
(LAUGHTER)
You know, I listen to a
wide variety of voices
that have expertise
in various areas.
I think it is fair to say,
whatever the complaints
that you want to make
about him are, that with
respect to China, one
of the most challenging
relationships we have, his
opening up China and his
ongoing relationships with
the leaders of China is an
incredibly useful
relationship for the
United States of America.
(APPLAUSE)
So if we want to pick and
choose -- and I certainly
do -- people I listen to,
people I don't listen to,
people I listen to for
certain areas, then I
think we have to be fair
and look at the entire
world, because it's a
big, complicated world out
there.
SANDERS: It is.
CLINTON: And, yes, people
we may disagree with on a
number of things may have
some insight, may have
some relationships that
are important for the
president to understand in
order to best protect the
United States.
(APPLAUSE)
SANDERS: I find -- I
mean, it's just a very
different, you know,
historical perspective
here.
Kissinger was one of those
people during the Vietnam
era who talked about
the domino theory.
Not everybody
remembers that.
You do.
I do.
The domino theory, you
know, if Vietnam goes,
China, da, da, da,
da, da, da, da.
That's what he talked
about, the great threat of
China.
And then, after the war,
this is the guy who, in
fact, yes, you're right,
he opened up relations
with China, and now pushed
various type of trade
agreements, resulting in
American workers losing
their jobs as corporations
moved to China.
The terrible,
authoritarian, Communist
dictatorship he warned
us about, now he's urging
companies to shut down
and move to China.
Not my kind of guy.
(APPLAUSE)
WOODRUFF: Senator, let
me -- let me move on to
another country
with which the U.S.
has a complicated
relationship, Senator
Sanders, and
that's Russia.
On the one hand, we're
aware that Russia is a
country that the United
States needs to cooperate
with.
WOODRUFF: Just tonight,
Secretary of State John
Kerry has announced what
appears to be an agreement
with the Russians to lead
-- that could lead toward
a ceasefire in Syria,
would be the first
cessation of conflict
in that country, in that
civil war in five years,
but it comes at a very
high price, because not
only have all -- have we
seen the deaths, the
removal of so many people,
millions of people, we now
see the Russians in the
last few weeks have bombed
in a way that benefits
President Assad, has
not gone after ISIS.
So my question to you is,
when it comes to dealing
with Russia, are you
prepared -- how hard are
you prepared to be?
Are you prepared to
institute further economic
sanctions?
Would you be prepared to
move militarily if Russia
moves on Eastern Europe?
It seems to me that Russia
recently has gotten the
better of the
United States.
SANDERS: Well, this
is what I would say.
It is a complicated
relationship.
I congratulate Secretary
of State John Kerry and
the president for working
on this agreement.
As you've indicated, what
is happening in Syria, the
number of people, the
hundreds of thousands of
people who have been
killed -- men, women,
20,000 children, the
people who are forced to
flee their own country --
their own country -- it is
unspeakable.
It is a real horror.
Now, what I think is that
right now we have got to
do our best in developing
positive relations with
Russia.
But let's be clear:
Russia's aggressive
actions in the Crimea and
in Ukraine have brought
about a situation where
President Obama and NATO
-- correctly, I believe --
are saying, you know what,
we're going to have to
beef up our troop level in
that part of the world
to tell Putin that his
aggressiveness is not
going to go unmatched,
that he is not going to
get away with aggressive
action.
I happen to believe that
Putin is doing what he is
doing because his economy
is increasingly in
shambles and he's trying
to rally his people in
support of him.
But bottom line is:
The president is right.
We have to put more money.
We have to work with NATO
to protect Eastern Europe
against any kind of
Russian aggression.
SANDERS: Well, with
respect to Syria, I really
do appreciate the efforts
that Secretary Kerry has
made.
The agreement on
humanitarian relief now
needs to be implemented,
because there are enclaves
that are literally filled
with starving people
throughout Syria.
The agreement on a
cease-fire, though, is
something that has to be
implemented more quickly
than the schedule that
the Russians agreed to.
You know, the Russians
wanted to buy time.
Are they buying time to
continue their bombardment
on behalf of the Assad
regime to further decimate
what's left of the
opposition, which would be
a grave disservice to
any kind of eventual
cease-fire?
So I know Secretary Kerry
is working extremely hard
to try to move that
cease-fire up as quickly
as possible.
But I would add this.
You know, the Security
Council finally got around
to adopting a resolution.
At the core of that
resolution is an agreement
I negotiated in June of
2012 in Geneva, which set
forth a cease-fire and
moving toward a political
resolution, trying to
bring the parties at stake
in Syria together.
This is incredibly
complicated, because we've
got Iran as a big player,
in addition to Russia.
We have Saudi Arabia,
Turkey, and others who
have very important
interests in their view.
This is one of the areas
I've disagreed with
Senator Sanders on, who
has called for Iranian
troops trying to end civil
war in Syria, which I
think would be
a grave mistake.
Putting Iranian troops
right on the border of the
Golan right next to Israel
would be a nonstarter for
me.
Trying to get Iran and
Saudi Arabia to work
together, as he has
suggested in the past, is
equally a nonstarter.
So let's support what
Secretary Kerry and the
president are doing, but
let's hope that we can
accelerate the cease-fire,
because I fear that the
Russians will continue
their bombing, try to do
everything they can to
destroy what's left of the
opposition.
And remember, the Russians
have not gone after ISIS
or any of the other
terrorist groups.
So as we get a
cease-fire and maybe some
humanitarian corridors,
that still leaves the
terrorist groups on the
doorstep of others in
Syria, Turkey, Lebanon,
Jordan, and the like.
So we've got some real
work to do, and let's try
to make sure we actually
implement what has been
agreed to with
the Russians.
(APPLAUSE)
SANDERS: Let me just
-- just say this.
For a start, the secretary
and I disagree -- and I
think the president does
not agree with her -- in
terms of the concept of
a no-fly zone in Syria.
I think you do have a
humanitarian tragedy
there, as I mentioned
a moment ago.
I applaud Secretary Kerry
and the president for
trying to put together
this agreement.
Let's hope that it holds.
SANDERS: But furthermore,
what we have got to do,
I'm sorry, yes, I do
believe that we have got
to do everything that
we can, and it will not
happen tomorrow.
But I do hope that in
years to come, just as
occurred with Cuba, 10,
20 years ago, people would
say, reach normalized
relations with Cuba.
And by the way, I hope we
can end the trade embargo
with Cuba as well.
But the idea that we some
day maybe have decent
relations with Iran, maybe
put pressure on them so
they end their support
for terrorism around the
world, yes, that is
something I want to
achieve.
And I believe that the
best way to do that is to
be aggressive, to be
principled, but to have
the goal of trying
to improve relations.
That's how you make
peace in the world.
You sit down and you work
with people, you make
demands of people, in this
case demanding Iran stop
the support of
international terrorism.
(APPLAUSE)
CLINTON: Well, I
respectfully disagree.
I think we have achieved
a great deal with the
Iranian nuclear agreement
to put a lid on the
Iranian nuclear
weapons program.
That has to be enforced
absolutely with
consequences for Iran at
the slightest deviation
from their requirements
under the agreement.
I do not think we should
promise or even look
toward normalizing
relations because we have
a lot of other business
to get done with Iran.
Yes, they have to stop
being the main state
sponsor of terrorism.
Yes, they have to stop
trying to destabilize the
Middle East, causing
even more chaos.
Yes, they've got to
get out of Syria.
They've got to quit
sponsoring Hezbollah and
Hamas.
They have got to quit
trying to ship rockets
into Gaza that can be
used against Israel.
We have a lot of work to
do with Iran before we
ever say that they could
move toward normalized
relations with us.
(APPLAUSE)
SANDERS: We have a
lot of work to do.
We have a lot
of work to do.
But I recall when
Secretary Clinton ran
against then-Senator
Obama, she was critical of
him for suggesting that
maybe you want to talk to
Iran, that you want to
talk to our enemies.
I have no illusion.
Of course you are right.
Iran is sponsoring
terrorism in many parts of
the world,
destabilizing areas.
Everybody knows that.
But our goal is, in fact,
to try over a period of
time to, in fact, deal
with our enemies, not just
ignore that reality.
(CROSSTALK)
CLINTON: ... Senator
Sanders, from a debate in
2008, quote what I said.
The question was, would
you meet with an adversary
without conditions?
I said no.
And in fact, in Obama
administration, we did not
meet with anybody
without conditions.
That is the appropriate
approach in order to get
the results that
you are seeking.
(APPLAUSE)
SANDERS: No, I think the
idea was that president --
then-Senator Obama was
wrong for suggesting that
it is a good idea to
talk to your opponents.
It's easier to talk
to your friends.
It's harder to talk
to your enemies.
I think we should do both.
(APPLAUSE)
IFILL: Let me move on.
You have both mentioned
the humanitarian tragedies
which have been an
outgrowth in part of what
has happened in
Syria and in Libya.
More than a million
refugees entered Europe in
2015.
Another 76,000 just last
month, that is about 2,000
arrivals every day.
Nearly 400 people have
been lost at sea so far
this year, crossing
the Mediterranean.
And there are reports
that 10,000 children are
missing.
If we are leaders in this
world, where should the
U.S.
be on this?
What should the United
States be doing, Secretary
Clinton?
CLINTON: Well, I was
pleased that NATO
announced just this week
that they're going to
start doing patrols in
the Mediterranean, in the
Aegean, to try to
interdict the smugglers,
to try to prevent the kind
of tragedies that we have
seen all too often, also
to try to prevent more
refugees from coming
to the European Union.
And it's especially
significant that they are
working with both Turkey
and Greece in order to do
this.
With respect to the United
States, I think our role
in NATO, our support for
the E.U., as well as our
willingness to take
refugees so long as they
are thoroughly vetted and
that we have confidence
from intelligence and
other sources that they
can come to our country,
we should be doing our
part.
And we should back up the
recent donors conference
to make sure we have made
our contribution to try to
deal with the enormous
cost that these refugees
are posing to Turkey and
to members of the E.U.
in particular.
CLINTON: This is a
humanitarian catastrophe.
There is no other
description of it.
So we do as the United
States have to support our
friends, our
allies in Europe.
We have to
stand with them.
We have to provide
financial support to them.
We have to provide the
NATO support to back up
the mission that
is going on.
And we have to take
properly vetted refugees
ourselves.
SANDERS: A couple of years
ago, I had the opportunity
to go on a congressional
delegation.
And I went to one of these
Turkish refugee camps
right on the
border of Syria.
And what a sad sight that
was: Men, women, children
forced out of their homes.
And Turkey, by the way,
did a very decent thing,
providing what was
reasonable housing and
conditions for
those people.
It seems to me that given
our history as a nation
that has been a beacon of
hope for the oppressed,
for the downtrodden, that
I very strongly disagree
with those Republican
candidates who say, you
know what, we've got to
turn our backs on women
and children who left
their home with nothing,
nothing at all.
That is not what America
is supposed to be about.
So I believe that working
with Europe -- and, by the
way, you know, we've
got some very wealthy
countries there in
that part of the world.
You got Kuwait and you got
Qatar and you got Saudi
Arabia.
They have a
responsibility, as well.
But I think this is a
worldwide -- that the
entire world needs to come
together to deal with this
horrific refugee crisis
we're seeing from Syria
and Afghanistan, as well.
(APPLAUSE)
WOODRUFF: And we have a
final question from our
Facebook family.
And it goes to
Senator Sanders.
It comes from
Robert Andrews.
He's a 40-year-old
stay-at-home dad in Dover,
Massachusetts.
He says, "The world has
seen many great leaders in
the course of
human history.
Can you name two leaders
-- one American and one
foreign -- who would
influence your foreign
policy decisions?
And why do you see
them as -- why are they
influential?"
SANDERS: You know,
Franklin Delano Roosevelt
took the oath of office
in 1933 at a time when 25
percent of the American
people were unemployed,
country was in
incredible despair.
And he stood before the
American people and he
said, "The only thing
we have to fear is fear
itself," a profound
statement that gave the
American people the
courage to believe that,
yes, we could get out of
that terrible depression.
And then what he did
is redefine the role of
government.
You know, you had Herbert
Hoover before that saying,
no, we got to only
worry about the deficit.
So what if mass
unemployment exists?
So what if children
are going hungry?
That's not the role
of the government.
And when FDR said, "Yeah,
it is," that we're going
to use all of the
resources that we have to
create jobs, to build
homes, to feed people, to
protect the farmers, we
are a nation which if we
come together there is
nothing that we could not
accomplish.
And kind of -- that's
what I see our campaign is
about right now.
In this particular moment
of serious crises, saying
to the American people
don't give up on the
political process.
don't listen to the Trumps
of the world and allowing
them to divide us.
If we reengage and get
involved, yeah, we can
have health care for all
people, we can make public
colleges and universities
tuition-free.
We do not have to have
massive levels of income
and wealth inequality.
In the same light, as the
foreign leader, Winston
Churchill's politics
were not my politics.
He was kind of a
conservative guy in many
respects.
But nobody can deny that
as a wartime leader, he
rallied the British people
when they stood virtually
alone against the Nazi
juggernaut and rallied
them and eventually won
an extraordinary victory.
Those are two leaders
that I admire very much.
(APPLAUSE)
CLINTON: I certainly
agree with FDR for all the
reasons Senator
Sanders said.
And I agree about the role
that he played both in war
and in peace on the
economy and defeating
fascism around the world.
I would choose Nelson
Mandela for his generosity
of heart, his
understanding of the need
for reconciliation.
CLINTON: But I want to
-- I want to follow up on
something having to do
with leadership, because,
you know, today Senator
Sanders said that
President Obama failed the
presidential leadership
test.
And this is not the
first time that he has
criticized
President Obama.
In the past he has
called him weak.
He has called him
a disappointment.
He wrote a forward for a
book that basically argued
voters should have buyers'
remorse when it comes to
President Obama's
leadership and legacy.
And I just couldn't agree
-- disagree more with
those kinds of comments.
You know, from my
perspective, maybe because
I understand what
President Obama inherited,
not only the worst
financial crisis but the
antipathy of the
Republicans in Congress, I
don't think he gets the
credit he deserves for
being a president...
(APPLAUSE)
CLINTON: ... who got
us out of that...
(APPLAUSE)
CLINTON: ... put us on
firm ground, and has sent
us into the future.
And it is a -- the kind of
criticism that we've heard
from Senator Sanders about
our president I expect
from Republicans.
I do not expect from
someone running for the
Democratic nomination to
succeed President Obama.
SANDERS: That is...
(APPLAUSE)
SANDERS: Madam Secretary,
that is a low blow.
I have worked with
President Obama for the
last seven years.
When President Obama came
into office we were losing
800,000 jobs a month,
800,000 jobs a month.
We had a $1.4
trillion deficit.
And the world's financial
system is on the verge of
collapse.
As a result of his efforts
and the efforts of Joe
Biden against
unprecedented, I was there
in the Senate,
unprecedented Republican
obstructionism, we have
made enormous progress.
(APPLAUSE)
SANDERS: But
you know what?
Last I heard we lived
in a democratic society.
Last I heard, a United
States senator had the
right to disagree with
the president, including a
president who has done
such an extraordinary job.
So I have voiced
criticisms.
You're right.
Maybe you haven't.
I have.
But I think to suggest
that I have voiced
criticism, this blurb that
you talk about, you know
what the blurb said?
The blurb said that the
next president of the
United States has got to
be aggressive in bringing
people into the
political process.
That's what I said.
That is what I believe.
(APPLAUSE)
SANDERS: President
Obama and I are friends.
As you know, he came to
Vermont to campaign for me
when he was a senator.
I have worked for
his re-election.
His first election
and his re-election.
But I think it is really
unfair to suggest that I
have not been supportive
of the president.
I have been a strong ally
with him on virtually
every issue.
Do senators have the
right to disagree with the
president?
Have you ever disagreed
with a president?
I suspect you may have.
(APPLAUSE)
CLINTON: You know,
Senator, what I am
concerned about, is not
disagreement on issues,
saying that this is what
I would rather do, I don't
agree with the president
on that, calling the
president weak, calling
him a disappointment,
calling several times that
he should have a primary
opponent when he ran for
re-election in 2012, you
know, I think that goes
further than saying we
have our disagreements.
As a senator, yes,
I was a senator.
I understand we can
disagree on the path
forward.
But those kinds of
personal assessments and
charges are ones that
I find particularly
troubling.
IFILL: Senator, if you
would like respond to --
you may respond to that
but it is time for closing
statements and you can
use your time for closing
statements to do that.
SANDERS: Well, one of us
ran against Barack Obama.
I was not that candidate.
(APPLAUSE)
SANDERS: All right, look,
this has been a great
debate.
A lot of interesting
issues have come together.
Let me conclude by
just saying this.
There is no president,
in my view, not Hillary
Clinton, not Bernie
Sanders, who has the
capability or the power to
take on Wall Street, large
campaign donors, the
corporate media, the big
money interests in
this country alone.
This campaign is not
just about electing a
president.
What this campaign is
about is creating a
process for a political
revolution in which
millions of Americans,
working people who have
given up on the political
process, they don't think
anybody hears their
pains or their concerns.
Young people for whom
getting involved in
politics is as, you know,
it's like going to the
moon.
It ain't going to happen.
Low income people who
are not involved in the
political process.
SANDERS: What this
campaign is not only about
electing someone who
has the most progressive
agenda, it is about
bringing tens of millions
of people together to
demand that we have a
government that represents
all of us and not just the
1 percent, who today
have so much economic and
political power.
Thank you all very much.
(APPLAUSE)
WOODRUFF:
Secretary Clinton?
CLINTON: You know, we --
we agree that we've got to
get unaccountable
money out of politics.
We agree that Wall Street
should never be allowed to
wreck Main Street again.
But here's the point I
want to make tonight.
I am not a single- issue
candidate, and I do not
believe we live in a
single-issue country.
I think that a lot of what
we have to overcome to
break down the barriers
that are holding people
back, whether it's poison
in the water of the
children of Flint, or
whether it's the poor
miners who are being left
out and left behind in
coal country, or whether
it is any other American
today who feels somehow
put down and oppressed by
racism, by sexism, by
discrimination against the
LGBT community, against
the kind of efforts that
need to be made to root
out all of these barriers,
that's what I
want to take on.
And here in Wisconsin, I
want to reiterate: We've
got to stand up for unions
and working people who
have done it before...
(APPLAUSE)
... the American middle
class, and who are being
attacked by ideologues,
by demagogues.
Yes, does Wall Street and
big financial interests,
along with drug companies,
insurance companies, big
oil, all of it, have
too much influence?
You're right.
But if we were to stop
that tomorrow, we would
still have the
indifference, the
negligence that
we saw in Flint.
We would still have racism
holding people back.
We would still have sexism
preventing women from
getting equal pay.
We would still have LGBT
people who get married on
Saturday and get
fired on Monday.
And we would still have
governors like Scott
Walker and others trying
to rip out the heart of
the middle class by making
it impossible to organize
and stand up for better
wages and working
conditions.
So I'm going to keep
talking about tearing down
all the barriers that
stand in the way of
Americans fulfilling their
potential, because I don't
think our country can live
up to its potential unless
we give a chance to every
single American to live up
to theirs.
(APPLAUSE)
IFILL: Thank you.
Thank you Senator Clinton.
Thank you,
Senator Sanders.
We also want to thank our
partners at Facebook and
our hosts here at the
University of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee.
(APPLAUSE)
WOODRUFF: And we want to
thank our audience, our
quiet audience here in
Helen Bader Concert Hall,
and to all of you
watching at home.
Thank you all.
Stay tuned for analysis of
the debate and the overall
race for the
Democratic nomination.
That's coming up next here
on PBS stations and online
at PBS.org/NewsHour.
IFILL: I'm going to remain
here in Milwaukee tomorrow
evening for a special
edition of Washington Week
here on PBS.
WOODRUFF: And I'm going
to be returning to
Washington.
I hope you'll join us for
the PBS NewsHour tomorrow
and every night.
That's it from all of
us here in Milwaukee.
We thank you.
IFILL: Good night.
(APPLAUSE)
END